# Data Manipulation via CLI

Although it may seem daunting to beginners, the Command Line Interface (CLI) is a powerful way to deal directly with the machine and the data to be analyzed. It is one of the standard ways of working in Bioinformatics and data science. It is also through the CLI that we access remote computer servers to perform more complex tasks.

**Notes:**

- This tutorial was adapted from the book *The Biostars Handbook* by Istvan Albert (2022). The original content was translated and its structure partially modified ***for educational purposes only***. **Reproduction for any other purpose is not permitted or consented to.**

- To complete this tutorial, please perform the previous one (101), *Introduction to the Command Line - UNIX*.

## Continuing with new useful terminal commands

- We will work with a fasta file of nucleotide sequences. This file is located on another server; we will copy the file remotely using the `wget` command. Place the file in a working directory `~/lessons`:

```
cd ~/lessons
```

- If you haven't created this directory/folder yet, create it with the command below:

```
mkdir lessons
```

- Now we will execute `wget`:

```
wget '[https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=15OCaUzNHqp2hD6sfAnQPxebBclr6tQTS](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=15OCaUzNHqp2hD6sfAnQPxebBclr6tQTS)' -O test.fasta
```

- Now let's learn some other useful commands, using *pipes* of different commands. Let's look at the last 10 lines of a file, piping two commands: `tail` and `head`.

```
tail -n 20 test.fasta | head
```

> *The first one, with the `-n 20` option, gives the last 20 lines of the file, and piping it with `head` will show the first 10 lines of those last 20.*

- How many sequences does this multi-fasta file have?

```
grep -c '>' test.fasta 
```

- Shall we extract only the fasta sequence headers?

```
grep '>' test.fasta
```

- Show the lines of the file that start with an ATG start codon:

```
grep "^ATG" test.fasta
```

*In this case, the `^` character searches for patterns at the beginning of a line.*

- Now let's count how many lines in a file contain the 'CAT' or 'GAT' triplets:

```
grep -c '[CG]AT' test.fasta
```

> *The `-c` option of the `grep` command counts the number of lines. The description '[CG]' denotes the regular expression for the search.*

Let's create other files using the `echo` command and the `>` redirector to work with the next commands.

- Creating a file with only lowercase letters:

```
echo 'this file only has lowercase letters' > examplefile.txt
```

- Now let's transform the lowercase letters of this file into uppercase using the `tr` command:

```
cat examplefile.txt | tr 'a-z' 'A-Z'
```

- Let's create a file to use the next command:

```
echo 'Chr1 Chr2 Chr1 Chr3 Chr1 Chr4 Chr1 Chr5' > examplefile1.txt
```

- Now let's change all occurrences of **'Chr1'** to **'Chromosome 1'** and write the output to a new file using the `sed` command:

```
cat examplefile1.txt | sed 's/Chr1/Chromosome 1/g' > examplefile2.txt
```

- See how the file turned out:

```
more examplefile2.txt
```

Now let's download the `min.fasta` file using `wget`. This file of nucleotide sequences is all in lowercase. Shall we transform it to uppercase?

- First, download the `min.fasta` file by running the command below:

```
wget '[https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1VPtm7uJGXiMy-wLX7Wou5_v-Om3H4Zs9](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1VPtm7uJGXiMy-wLX7Wou5_v-Om3H4Zs9)' -O min.fasta
```

- Now, check the file using the `more` command:

```
more min.fasta
```

- Now use the combination of `cat` and `tr` commands:

```
cat min.fasta | tr 'a-z' 'A-Z'
```

- Since you didn't specify an output file, the command output went to the screen. Now repeat the command like this:

```
cat min.fasta | tr 'a-z' 'A-Z' > UPPER.fasta
```

## Obtaining data from an online genome

Now let's download a chromosomal features table (information and characteristics) from the SGD database (*Saccharomyces* Genome Database). These files can also be accessed via the browser [HERE](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1AQ1d3IGNOWFdsZkTLuC2ndJbgKGKn9yR "null").

> *The curl command does not work in Cocalc. Download the file via the link above and add it to CoCalc via File > New.*

We will now use another command to download remote files, the `curl` command:

```
curl [http://sgd-archive.yeastgenome.org/curation/chromosomal_feature/SGD_features.tab](http://sgd-archive.yeastgenome.org/curation/chromosomal_feature/SGD_features.tab) > sc.tab
```

> *Note that with the `curl` command, we must specify a local file using the `>` redirection. If it is not used, the default is output to the screen.*

Let's also download the [README](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1-NrHJv_Ypiq2HrsAeDbECOqRZFMTG50a "null") file which describes how the features file above is organized:

```
curl [http://sgd-archive.yeastgenome.org/curation/chromosomal_feature/SGD_features.README](http://sgd-archive.yeastgenome.org/curation/chromosomal_feature/SGD_features.README) > README
```

Check what each column of the **'sc.tab'** file describes by viewing the **README** file:

```
more README
```

> The file is in English! Get used to it. Practically everything in bioinformatics is in the English language. Therefore, in plain English: *Dude, get over it and move on! Get a dictionary or use Google Translator or (even better) learn English!*

## Obtaining information about the file

The **sc.tab** file is a file with information on chromosomal regions of the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* where the information for the columns is separated by 'tabs'. It is a file with numerous columns and rows, extremely large. This same file can be imported into a data spreadsheet (Excel® style). Even so, its visualization is complicated due to its size, besides the fact that it is not always possible to open a spreadsheet manager in a terminal. Here we will use a series of simple UNIX commands (some already seen in the previous tutorial, please do them!) to obtain and extract information from this file without having to open it and check line by line.

To check how many lines this file has:

```
wc -l sc.tab
```

To check how the file begins:

```
head sc.tab
```

To check which lines have the desired pattern, for example, the pattern 'YAL060W'?

```
grep YAL060W sc.tab | head
```

To color the searched pattern and facilitate visualization on the terminal screen:

```
grep YAL060W sc.tab --color=always | head
```

We can also extract the lines containing the pattern to a new file:

```
grep YAL060W sc.tab > match.tab
```

The command below does exactly the same thing as the previous one. It is longer and runs one more program (`cat`), but it is clearer than the previous one because it better specifies the file to be opened:

```
cat sc.tab | grep YAL060W > match1.tab
```

To check how many lines in the file contain the word **'gene'**:

```
cat sc.tab | grep gene | wc -l
```

The command above finds the word **gene** anywhere in the line. This file uses the designation *feature type* (Column 2) 'ORF' for protein-coding genes. Building the commands in small steps, we will extract the information containing ORF with the `cut` command:

```
cat sc.tab | head
cat sc.tab | cut -f 2 | head
cat sc.tab | cut -f 2 | grep ORF | head
```

> *Note that the `-f 2` option specifies that we want column 2 of this file*.

We can select multiple columns of interest from the output, also with the `cut` command:

```
cat sc.tab | cut -f 2,3,4 | grep ORF | head
```

We can also get information on how many columns have the word **ORF** in the second column:

```
cat sc.tab | cut -f 2,3,4 | grep ORF | wc -l
```

And the lines that **DO NOT HAVE** a certain pattern? We can also get them using the `-v` option of the `grep` command, which inverts its action, showing the lines that do not have the pattern. In this case, we want to extract the lines that do not have the pattern ***Dubious***:

```
cat sc.tab | grep -v Dubious | cut -f 2,5,9 | wc -l
```

How many *features* exist in this data:

```
cat sc.tab | cut -f 2 > features.tab
```

When sorting, we place consecutive identical entries near each other:

```
cat features.tab | sort | head 
```

To find unique words, the `uniq` command collapses consecutive identical words into just one:

```
cat features.tab | sort | uniq | head 
```

Using the `-c` option with the `uniq` command will not only collapse consecutive entries but will also show their count:

```
cat features.tab | sort | uniq -c | head 
```

Don't worry if you don't know these commands and their respective options by heart. This comes with time and use. At one point or another, experienced bioinformaticians need to consult the manual (`man` command) or recall what these commands do. It's always worth bookmarking a site that contains a list of the main UNIX commands. Google searches or consultations with Chat-GPT also help a lot when we need to recall commands.
